---
date: 2012-02-23 9:30 PM
title: Mundane Grace
source:
layout: post
---

Recently on [Bullseye][], Jesse Thorn recommended [Sail Away][] by Randy
Newman. It's a kind of alternate history song with an interesting
premise. As Thorn explains, Amazing Grace was written by a former slaver
who had a religious conversion and became an abolitionist. I wasn't
familiar with that background, possibly because I subconsciously assume
that all hymns are hundreds of years old at the least. Sail Away is the
counterfactual counterpart to Amazing Grace: a song by an unrepentant
slaver extolling the virtues of American slavery to his African
soon-to-be victims.

I hadn't heard this song before, and I have to say it's pretty great.
The juxtaposition of the calming, inviting music and lyrics with the
reprehensible message makes me think hard about marketing and the many
ways in which you can be fooled by a slick and appealing presentation.
It's also a reminder that most people back then didn't undergo a
dramatic religious experience and change their views. Most slavers and
slave owners stayed just as they were. Thinking about that fact forces
you to admit that if you were in that situation yourself, you would
probably do no better than our ancestors did. They weren't monsters,
after all. At least not most of them. They were just people in a
horrible position of power who found it easy enough to rationalize that
power when everyone and everything in their culture told them that it
was the right thing to do.

[Bullseye]: http://www.maximumfun.org/bullseye/bullseye-jesse-thorn-rap-recommendations-tim-eric-cartoonist-roz-chast-and-gods-favorite-th
[Sail Away]: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=chaP4MCXp4w
