---
date: 2012-01-12 10:59 PM
title: Ready Player One
source: 
layout: post
---

This Christmas, my cousin Kevin gave me a copy of *Ready Player One*, by
Ernest Cline (and his wife April gave me a bottle of Stone Double
Bastard Ale&mdash;highly recommended). I devoured it over the next few
days. When he asked me what I thought of it, I said, more or less, that
it was a fun read that I really enjoyed even if it didn't exactly
feature deathless prose.

I think that's an accurate review, but a very superficial one. It's
essentially the same as my take on *The Hunger Games*, *Harry Potter*,
and plenty of other books, despite the fact that those books have very
different strengths and weaknesses compared to *Ready Player One*. So, I
fear I was a bit lazy in my analysis.

I didn't think much more of it until I listened to an episode of the
great nerd media podcast [The Incomparable][] dedicated to the book.
They really tore it apart, which helped me to crystallize my own
thoughts about the book. I always like to drill down to specifics, so
let's take a look at a passage that Jon Siracusa called out during the
podcast:

> "What up, Humperdinck?" I said. This was a game we played. I always
> called him by some random H name, like Harry, Hubert, Henry, or Hogan.
> I was making guesses at his real first name, which, he'd once confided
> to me, began with the letter "H." (page 38)

Siracusa points out, correctly in my estimation, that this is bad
writing. It's a blatant example of telling instead of showing, and it
shows a real lack of faith in the reader to pick up on what's happening
without being told explicitly.

What Siracusa didn't point out is that this passage doesn't even seem to
be true in the world of the book. I can't think of a single time that
Wade calls Aech anything other than his name after the end of this
scene. This passage seems to be there to make sure we know how to
pronounce Aech's name and to let us know that Aech and Wade don't know
each other in real life, but these points are both made explicitly
elsewhere.

Siracusa also observes that Cline hasn't put much thought into how this
virtual world actually works. He seems to want to set his story in the
kind of wholesale virtual world that you see in *The Matrix*,
*Accelerando*, or *The Metamorphosis of Prime Intellect*[^mopi], but it
doesn't seem like the hardware he describes could possibly deliver the
experiences he describes, especially considering that the full-body
haptic hardware is completely optional and the game can be played
perfectly well by a kid with some glasses and gloves sitting in a rusted
out van.

I agree with most of the other criticisms from the show as well. The
plot twists were thoroughly telegraphed, the plot culminates in a series
of nearly literal deus ex machinas, Wade's various extreme proficiencies
seem implausible at best, the IOI is cartoonishly, mustache-twirlingly
evil, and so on. Nevertheless, I thoroughly enjoyed this book. I read it
in just a few days, and even when I was rolling my eyes at portions of
the book, I was eating it up.

Part of my enjoyment was surely nostalgia. Although I'm a little young
for a lot of the references, when Zork came up I was immediately
transported back to the countless hours I spent gazing intently at my
dad's computer in what was essentially a closet. Part of it was the pace
of the plot, which moved forward quickly enough that there wasn't time
to dwell overly long on any one section's shortcomings. Part of it was
the fact that I love games, and it never hurts to have a programmer at
the center of things.

So sure, this book has its flaws, and I don't know if it will make any
kind of sense in 20 or 30 years. But for now, I had an awful lot of fun
reading it, and that's more than good enough for me.

[The Incomparable]: http://5by5.tv/incomparable
[^mopi]: Warning: I don't necessarily recommend this book, even though I
enjoyed it, because it contains some really distasteful stuff that I
think feels more like vicarious transgressive thrills for the author
than a necessary part of the plot. However, the virtual world in that
story is an excellent example of the kind of world the characters in
*Ready Player One* seem to inhabit.
